

Interface – Key Points

An interface is used to achieve 100% abstraction.
It is declared using the interface keyword.
All methods are public and abstract by default (except default and static methods).
Variables are public, static, and final by default.
An interface cannot have constructors.
It cannot contain instance variables.
A class uses the implements keyword to implement an interface.
Multiple inheritance is supported using interfaces.
A class must override all abstract methods of the interface.
Interfaces are mainly used for standardization and loose coupling.
From Java 8:
default methods are allowed.
static methods are allowed.
From Java 9:
private methods are allowed.






Abstract Class – Key Points

An abstract class is used for partial abstraction.
It is declared using the abstract keyword.
It can have abstract and non-abstract (concrete) methods.
Variables can be instance, static, final, or non-fina
An abstract class can have constructors.
A class uses the extends keyword to inherit an abstract class.
Multiple inheritance is not supported with abstract classes.
A child class must override all abstract methods, or it must also be abstract.
Abstract classes are used when classes are closely related.
They can contain instance methods with implementation.






Class – Key Points 

A class is a blueprint or template used to create objects.
It represents real-world entities.
A class is declared using the class keyword.
It is a user-defined data type.
A class can contain:
Variables (fields)
Methods
Constructors
Blocks (static / instance)
A class does not occupy memory until an object is created.
Objects are created using the new keyword.
A class supports encapsulation by combining data and methods.
A class can have access modifiers (public, default, protected, private).
A class can have constructors to initialize objects.
A class can contain static and non-static members.
One class can create multiple objects.
A class can inherit another class using the extends keyword.
Java supports single inheritance for classes.
A class can implement multiple interfaces.
A class can contain the main() method.
A class can be:
Normal class
Final class
Abstract class
A class can include business logic.

